---
title: HTML attribute vs DOM property
description: Find out how we have been thinking wrongly about HTML attributes and DOM properties being the same.
sidebar_label: Attribute Vs Property
---

- HTML is a language, DOM is an object model that browsers use in order to represent the structure of the page.
- Attribute is said in the context of the HTML page structure, whereas DOM properties are said in the context of DOM object.
- Attribute is said in the perspective of HTML language whereas the property is said in the perspective of JavaScript language.
- HTML is given by server and DOM is generated by browser based on the HTML page structure
- HTML attributes can be modified from HTML as well as JavaScript, where as DOM properties can be accessed primary from JavaScript.
- HTML attribute names are generally hyphenated and lower-case words; DOM properties are always camel-cased.
- Most of the HTML attributes have the corresponding DOM property names (one to one correspondence); But some of them need a different approach to access through JavaScript

  - CSS classes are added in HTML through `class` attribute; They can then be accessed or manipulated through `[element].classList` (`.add()`, `.contains()`, `.remove()`)
  - Data attributes are added in HTML through `data-*` attribute; Then can then be accessed or modified through `[element].dataset.[camelCasedAttribute]`.

- Modifying DOM properties will immediately reflect in the page; Modifying HTML attributes through `setAttribute` may not always work this way. Good example for this is `<input>` element's value. An input element's value attribute only sets its default value, updating it through JavaScript using `setAttribute` will not make the actual value change. Use `[element].value` property to change the actual value.
- All HTML elements must be given values and they can be strings only; Some DOM properties may exist in HTML without a value assigned. Classic example is `disabled` attribute. Also note that `disabled` state cannot be assigned by using `setAttribute` to actually disable or enable it; instead, use the `.disabled` prop and assign `true` or `false` to affect it in JavaScript.

### More reading:

[https://dotnettutorials.net/lesson/html-attribute-vs-dom-property/](https://dotnettutorials.net/lesson/html-attribute-vs-dom-property/)
