src/pages/all-articles.mdx, before:

---
title: All articles
description: All technical articles from Naga Chaitanya Konada
---

import ArticleGrid from '../components/ArticleGrid';



# Guides

These are quite fun working with, just follow the steps and learn.

<ArticleGrid 
  articles={[
    { 
      title: "A Simple Journal App", 
      desc: "I built a CodePen app that resembles a preliminary Journal app, using React, Bootstrap, Moment.js and localStorage as a DB.", 
      link: "/articles/guides/simple-journal-app"
    },
    { 
      title: "Creating React Components", 
      desc: "I would like to show the different ways we can create React Components. I like the arrow function statement style the most.", 
      link: "/articles/guides/creating-react-components"
    },
    { 
      title: "Image Upload Functionality", 
      desc: "This post can be considered as a written version of my YouTube mini-series on image upload end-to-end functionality.", 
      link: "/articles/guides/image-upload"
    },
    { 
      title: "Javascript History Pushstate", 
      desc: "I built a CodePen app that resembles a preliminary Journal app, using React, Bootstrap, Moment.js and localStorage as a DB.", 
      link: "/articles/guides/javascript-history-pushstate"
    },
    { 
      title: "Blog post layout using CSS flexbox", 
      desc: "I built a CodePen app that resembles a preliminary Journal app, using React, Bootstrap, Moment.js and localStorage as a DB.", 
      link: "/articles/guides/css-flexbox-blog-layout"
    },
    { 
      title: "Blog post layout using CSS grids", 
      desc: "I built a CodePen app that resembles a preliminary Journal app, using React, Bootstrap, Moment.js and localStorage as a DB.", 
      link: "/articles/guides/css-grid-blog-layout"
    },
    { 
      title: "JavaScript execution context (this)", 
      desc: "I built a CodePen app that resembles a preliminary Journal app, using React, Bootstrap, Moment.js and localStorage as a DB.", 
      link: "/articles/guides/javascript-execution-context"
    },
    { 
      title: "Animate on scroll in React", 
      desc: "I built a CodePen app that resembles a preliminary Journal app, using React, Bootstrap, Moment.js and localStorage as a DB.", 
      link: "/articles/guides/animate-on-scroll-react"
    },
  ]}
/>


---

# Insights

Sometimes, I feel like I should analyze, compare or critisize things. This is where I put them.

<ArticleGrid 
  articles={[
    { 
      title: "Headless CMS Comparison", 
      desc: "A fun comparison of popular headless cms frameworks or tools out there.", 
      link: "/articles/insights/headless-cms-comparison"
    },
    { 
      title: "React Component Reusability - best practices", 
      desc: "These are some of the points related to best practices for reusable components in React-based projects.", 
      link: "/articles/insights/component-reusability-react"
    },
    { 
      title: "React vs Vue (A feature comparison)", 
      desc: "A short comparison about the differences between React JS and Vue JS.", 
      link: "/articles/insights/react-vs-vue"
    },
    { 
      title: "HTML attribute vs DOM property", 
      desc: "Find out how we have been thinking wrongly about HTML attributes and DOM properties being the same.", 
      link: "/articles/insights/attribute-vs-property"
    },
    { 
      title: "Web components or custom elements", 
      desc: "What is so great about these new kind of HTML elements?", 
      link: "/articles/insights/custom-elements"
    },
    { 
      title: "Javascript functional programming", 
      desc: "Lets look at one of the most popular programming paradigms in use today.", 
      link: "/articles/insights/functional-programming"
    },
  ]} 
/>

---

# Trivia

Feast on these short and sweet bits of trivia.

<ArticleGrid 
  articles={[
    {
      title: "How to check if you are in an iFrame",
      desc: "What if you want to check if your page is hosted in an i-frame and may be prevent certain features?",
      link: "/articles/trivia/iframe-detect"
    },
    {
      title: "The `:empty` pseudo selector in CSS",
      desc: "When you want to style some empty elements in HTML, you can use the :empty selector.",
      link: "/articles/trivia/empty-pseudo-selector"
    },
    {
      title: "Post vs put vs patch",
      desc: "This topic has always boggled me. I thought they were interchangeable.",
      link: "/articles/trivia/post-put-patch"
    },
    {
      title: "JavaScript closures",
      desc: "A quick fact check about JavaScript closures.",
      link: "/articles/trivia/javascript-closures"
    },
    {
      title: "JavaScript `const` keyword",
      desc: "Ecmascript 6 introduces this new const keyword",
      link: "/articles/trivia/javascript-const"
    },
    {
      title: "`let` me explain",
      desc: "The let keyword in Ecmascript 6 is a bit similar to var but it is different in many nice ways.",
      link: "/articles/trivia/javascript-let"
    },
    {
      title: "Detect array or object",
      desc: "We take a quick look at how to check if something is an array or an object.",
      link: "/articles/trivia/detect-array-object"
    }
  ]}
/>

Commit message:

feat: new blog post Most Popular Libraries

src/pages/all-articles.mdx, after:

---
title: All articles
description: All technical articles from Naga Chaitanya Konada
---

import ArticleGrid from '../components/ArticleGrid';



# Guides

These are quite fun working with, just follow the steps and learn.

<ArticleGrid 
  articles={[
    { 
      title: "A Simple Journal App", 
      desc: "I built a CodePen app that resembles a preliminary Journal app, using React, Bootstrap, Moment.js and localStorage as a DB.", 
      link: "/articles/guides/simple-journal-app"
    },
    { 
      title: "Creating React Components", 
      desc: "I would like to show the different ways we can create React Components. I like the arrow function statement style the most.", 
      link: "/articles/guides/creating-react-components"
    },
    { 
      title: "Image Upload Functionality", 
      desc: "This post can be considered as a written version of my YouTube mini-series on image upload end-to-end functionality.", 
      link: "/articles/guides/image-upload"
    },
    { 
      title: "Javascript History Pushstate", 
      desc: "I built a CodePen app that resembles a preliminary Journal app, using React, Bootstrap, Moment.js and localStorage as a DB.", 
      link: "/articles/guides/javascript-history-pushstate"
    },
    { 
      title: "Blog post layout using CSS flexbox", 
      desc: "I built a CodePen app that resembles a preliminary Journal app, using React, Bootstrap, Moment.js and localStorage as a DB.", 
      link: "/articles/guides/css-flexbox-blog-layout"
    },
    { 
      title: "Blog post layout using CSS grids", 
      desc: "I built a CodePen app that resembles a preliminary Journal app, using React, Bootstrap, Moment.js and localStorage as a DB.", 
      link: "/articles/guides/css-grid-blog-layout"
    },
    { 
      title: "JavaScript execution context (this)", 
      desc: "I built a CodePen app that resembles a preliminary Journal app, using React, Bootstrap, Moment.js and localStorage as a DB.", 
      link: "/articles/guides/javascript-execution-context"
    },
    { 
      title: "Animate on scroll in React", 
      desc: "I built a CodePen app that resembles a preliminary Journal app, using React, Bootstrap, Moment.js and localStorage as a DB.", 
      link: "/articles/guides/animate-on-scroll-react"
    },
  ]}
/>


---

# Insights

Sometimes, I feel like I should analyze, compare or critisize things. This is where I put them.

<ArticleGrid 
  articles={[
    { 
      title: "Headless CMS Comparison", 
      desc: "A fun comparison of popular headless cms frameworks or tools out there.", 
      link: "/articles/insights/headless-cms-comparison"
    },
    { 
      title: "React Component Reusability - best practices", 
      desc: "These are some of the points related to best practices for reusable components in React-based projects.", 
      link: "/articles/insights/component-reusability-react"
    },
    { 
      title: "React vs Vue (A feature comparison)", 
      desc: "A short comparison about the differences between React JS and Vue JS.", 
      link: "/articles/insights/react-vs-vue"
    },
    { 
      title: "HTML attribute vs DOM property", 
      desc: "Find out how we have been thinking wrongly about HTML attributes and DOM properties being the same.", 
      link: "/articles/insights/attribute-vs-property"
    },
    { 
      title: "Web components or custom elements", 
      desc: "What is so great about these new kind of HTML elements?", 
      link: "/articles/insights/custom-elements"
    },
    { 
      title: "Javascript functional programming", 
      desc: "Lets look at one of the most popular programming paradigms in use today.", 
      link: "/articles/insights/functional-programming"
    },
    { 
      title: "Most Popular Library", 
      desc: "This post explores the most popular libraries and frameworks across various technologies and software development streams based on Github stars and usage.", 
      link: "/articles/insights/most-popular-library"
    },
  ]} 
/>

---

# Trivia

Feast on these short and sweet bits of trivia.

<ArticleGrid 
  articles={[
    {
      title: "How to check if you are in an iFrame",
      desc: "What if you want to check if your page is hosted in an i-frame and may be prevent certain features?",
      link: "/articles/trivia/iframe-detect"
    },
    {
      title: "The `:empty` pseudo selector in CSS",
      desc: "When you want to style some empty elements in HTML, you can use the :empty selector.",
      link: "/articles/trivia/empty-pseudo-selector"
    },
    {
      title: "Post vs put vs patch",
      desc: "This topic has always boggled me. I thought they were interchangeable.",
      link: "/articles/trivia/post-put-patch"
    },
    {
      title: "JavaScript closures",
      desc: "A quick fact check about JavaScript closures.",
      link: "/articles/trivia/javascript-closures"
    },
    {
      title: "JavaScript `const` keyword",
      desc: "Ecmascript 6 introduces this new const keyword",
      link: "/articles/trivia/javascript-const"
    },
    {
      title: "`let` me explain",
      desc: "The let keyword in Ecmascript 6 is a bit similar to var but it is different in many nice ways.",
      link: "/articles/trivia/javascript-let"
    },
    {
      title: "Detect array or object",
      desc: "We take a quick look at how to check if something is an array or an object.",
      link: "/articles/trivia/detect-array-object"
    }
  ]}
/>
